The Project Gutenberg eBook of The necessity of disinterment, under
existing circumstances, by William Cooke

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The necessity of disinterment, under existing circumstances

Author: William Cooke

Release Date: November 1, 2022 [eBook #69283]

Language: English

Produced by: Carol Brown, and The Online Distributed Proofreading Team
             at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
             generously made available by The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NECESSITY OF
DISINTERMENT, UNDER EXISTING CIRCUMSTANCES ***





THE

NECESSITY OF DISINTERMENT,

UNDER EXISTING CIRCUMSTANCES.




THE

NECESSITY OF DISINTERMENT,

UNDER EXISTING CIRCUMSTANCES,

BEING

AN APOLOGY, &c.,

IN

A LETTER TO THE MAYOR OF EXETER.

BY

WILLIAM COOKE, SURGEON.


“All foreigners express astonishment, when informed, that the teachers
of Anatomy, in this country, are obliged to depend, for the power of
communicating this most necessary and important knowledge, upon a
precarious supply of bodies, which have been suffered to become
putrid, and afterwards been interred. This is, indeed, a national
disgrace; and formerly I would not willingly have acknowledged the
fact of the disinterment of bodies, because it tends to disquiet the
best feelings of the public. The newspaper writers, however, have so
blazoned it forth, as to render any attempt to conceal it unavailing.”

                                                      MR. ABERNETHY.




LONDON:

PUBLISHED BY SHERWOOD, GILBERT, AND PIPER,

PATERNOSTER-ROW.

MDCCCXXVII.




Mills, Jowett, and Mills, Bolt-court, Fleet-street.




AN APOLOGY, &c.


SIR,

Actuated by a respectful deference to the chief magistrate of the city
of Exeter, I venture to address that individual, who so ably occupies
the place and station, at the present moment. After the remarks which
fell from Mr. Justice Park upon the subject of local jurisdiction at
the late city assize,――remarks which no one in court, and least of all
yourself, can possibly have forgotten,――there can be no occasion for
my referring to the subject, for the sake of any explanation of my
conduct, in procuring the removal of my past cause into an adjoining
county.

You know, I presume to think, Sir, that it is difficult for men
even of enlarged minds to divest themselves of opinions once
formed,――perhaps publicly declared.――Rumour has a thousand tongues,
and prejudice catches every whisper;――is it fair then, that I, or any
one else should be tried by a jury who could by any possibility
prejudge the question? Otherwise, the amount of evidence adduced,
would be but too frequently a secondary consideration. Jurymen at
least might come into court with prejudiced minds; and though
magistrates of talent and character, might, undoubtedly, be very far
from casting “the trash their own suspicion breeds, into the scale
they hold,” yet it would be superfluous to inform you, Sir, that the
mischievous operation of bias and prejudice, need not extend further
than the jurybox, to annihilate every shadow of fair and impartial
justice.

I do not conceive any farther explanation necessary, Sir, after the
forcible remarks of the learned judge to the same effect; and if any
apology seem to be called for, I beg that it may be considered as
consisting in that explanation which was so appositely provided.

The objects of this letter, Sir, are various: for, after having
implored your forbearance, as to the liberty I have taken, in placing
your distinguished name in its title page, I would, with your
permission, draw your attention to the circumstances of my late
prosecution. I would, secondly, apologize for some particulars
connected with the case. Thirdly, I would venture to attempt a
demonstration of the necessity and advantages of anatomical pursuits.
And, fourthly, endeavour to convince you, that something to facilitate
the acquisition of subjects _ought to be done_, and that something _is
about to be effected_.

The dead body of a poor woman was taken from a grave; and with such a
seeming recklessness of consequences, that no steps appeared to have
been taken to prevent detection, and, I had almost said, less than
none to shield public and private feelings from the grossest outrage.
Under such circumstances, was it not the duty of the parish officers
to search for the body, to re-inter it, and to punish the offenders?
Certainly; and had that appeared to have been their only aim,――had
they temperately removed the body, and then indicted me (as it was
found in my possession) for a _misdemeanor_,――I should not have
thought of changing the _venue_ of the late trial into the adjoining
county. But, the desperate proceedings of my prosecutors alarmed me,
and induced me to resolve, that I would not be tried by men who seemed
actuated by a sort of fury. Nemesis, or some of the destinies of
Arimanes, seemed to be employed upon them, and to be working almost as
monstrous evils, as when they

                         “From the dull,――
     Do shape out oracles to rule the world.”

I need not inform you, Sir, but I am anxious to explain to the public,
that _four_ constables were sent to my house, as if some strong
opposition had been expected, or as if there was reason to apprehend
murderous proceedings. The body was found, identified, and quietly
surrendered, and, I believe, there were no particular marks of
violence upon it. I was conducted to the Guildhall, as I supposed to
account for my possession of it; and this I was prepared to do. The
usual proceedings were gone through with no lack of that awful gravity
which suited with the case, and after the ordinary forms. The body
lost was found, and that in my possession, so that every thing seemed
clear and satisfactory, and one would have thought facts enough had
been substantiated as a foundation for future proceedings. But, it
occurred to a person present, (_evidently in office_,) that certain
valuable effects, such as gold rings, and crosses of gold and
jewellery, together with (it was impossible to say what of) needlework
and fine linen, might, _very probably_, have been interred with this
poor woman; and although this _brilliant_ suggestion, I dare say,
seemed worth very little to the intelligent bench of Magistrates,
(one, two, or three of whom saw it in its true colours, and smiled
upon the officious zeal of the officer,) yet as it came from a quarter
to which they were accustomed to pay respect, they did not think it
right, I suppose, entirely to overlook it. It was replied to the
proper question on this important subject, “There is some linen
missing,” and although it was, or very well might have been, presumed,
from the silence of the witness, that no treasure had been interred
with the body, or that it was safe and untouched if it had, yet, (by a
majority, I suppose,) _it was thought advisable_,――and my indignant
feelings compel me into seriousness when I relate it,――_to send
officers a second time to my residence, to search for stolen linen_,
which must necessarily have been of the most ordinary description and
utterly valueless, but _upon the finding of which_, some absurdly
thought, _I might be indicted for felony, and thereupon committed to
prison_. I am acquainted with those, Sir, who hoped for this result;
_nay, with one in office, who was heard to express a resolution,
ready formed, and that before the examination of a single witness,
that it should be brought about_. I know their names, and may let the
public know them too. They are deeply enough implicated already, and
let them beware lest fresh exposures tread upon the heels of their
precursors. Linen was found and identified, and it was of about
twopence value. It is true my very ingenious and able Solicitor, Mr.
Brutton, after some difficulty, succeeded in convincing you of the
non-existence of any virtual felony, (as was shown by your admitting
me to bail upon moderate securities,) yet, could no arguments of Mr.
Brutton, or of a few gentlemen who steadily opposed their rancorous
proceedings, abate the fury of certain individuals of the Parish of
St. David. These persons, catching at the hint profoundly thrown out
in the Chamber, instructed counsel, not only to proceed against me for
the misdemeanor, (to which, as I had possession of the body sought, I
would have pleaded guilty immediately,) but to lay an indictment for
felony also,――an indictment, charging me with a disgraceful and
heinous offence, which _they knew I never did or thought of doing, and
which I indignantly throw back on my accusers, one and all,
collectively and individually_.

Neither need I inform you, Mr. Mayor, who, though yourself a
parishioner, are, I am sure, as a magistrate, and a gentleman,
strongly opposed to any such malicious proceedings, that parish
meetings were called again and again, during divine service, (being
considered, I suppose, a part of it,) for the purpose of supporting
this double indictment, the expenses of which, it was even proposed to
defray by a rate upon the parish! In justice to that parish, however,
I am bound to admit, that the proceedings of these meetings, both
originated with and were conducted by obscure individuals. Some of the
more respectable parishioners were ignorant of the _first_ meeting,
till its resolutions were made known to them; resolutions to prosecute
me for a felony, which, but for this _accident_, would never have been
adopted. This is evidenced by the opposition with which these
gentlemen met all subsequent proceedings: so that I repeat, it is but
justice to allow, that, though outvoted continually, the conduct of
these gentlemen, in the estimation of the liberal minded, will half
redeem the character of the parish. They will be justified by that
approval of their exertions which was implied in the conduct of Mr.
Justice Park, when he declared that he should be very sorry to try
such an indictment, and gave directions to the jury accordingly: and
again, by the express declaration of the Court of King’s Bench,
through Mr. Justice Bayley. But these gentlemen _were_ outvoted, a
subscription _was_ entered upon, and the originators of this unfounded
indictment triumphed. But, Sir, was I to be tried by such men for a
felony? Tried, I say, because it is more than probable, that some of
those who met to prosecute, would have sat as jurors upon the trial;
and then, Sir, what could have been effected but a ready-made verdict,
and the severest punishments. I confess that I trembled under such an
apprehension, and caught with avidity at the remedy proposed by my
solicitor, that I should remove the cause into the Court of King’s
Bench. The matter being thus carried to London, this indictment for
felony was smiled upon as a jest, or spoken of as a mistake, by most
persons to whom it was mentioned. In one instance, a mistake indeed,
and of some consequence, had very nearly arisen from its unusual
nature. A legal gentleman, perceiving that it was a charge of
disinterment, and no more expecting an indictment for felony than one
for high treason, neglected, for some days, to inform me that it was
necessary I should plead to so serious a matter in person. A general
exclamation of surprise and merriment attended its relation; except in
some persons, who conceived it too serious a piece of malice to be met
in any other way than by indignant deprecation. For my own part, I was
content: I felt assured of the view which an enlightened judge would
take of the subject; that he would overrule so ridiculous a complaint,
as that a medical man, of no bad character, had stolen some old rags
of a few pence value, for the purpose of using or selling them: and in
this _intent_ only, as is manifest to common sense, consists the
essence of felony.

Sir, you are acquainted with the judgment of the Court of King’s
Bench, as, doubtless, my prosecutors are also. Can I not easily
imagine, or rather, may I not positively infer, the poignant chagrin
of those personages, upon finding that I had been more leniently dealt
with than they had hoped. Will they deny that _imprisonment_ was the
doom which their best wishes had assigned me; and will they, after six
months’ persecution, pretend, that there was the slightest leniency in
their inclinations? Not that I mean to say that my sentence was light:
much the contrary. I lament it, not only on my own account, but from a
consideration of the baneful effect which it _may_ have upon those
numerous and ardent minds, who are either prosecuting, or about to
prosecute, their important studies. But, _nil desperandum_: nothing,
Sir, no prejudices, no misguided and self-injuring prosecutors, and
(pardon me if I say) no magisterial interference, can check the ardour
of anatomical students, any more than bigotry, pride, or timidity,
(whichever be the motive of its opponents,) can shut that broad gate,
which is opening, and will be opened wide, for the diffusion of
universal knowledge. It is cheering to reflect, that in the very teeth
of this conviction and sentence, and only a few days subsequent to the
latter, when it must have been fresh in mind, and doubtless had been
seriously pondered over both by teacher and pupils, Dr. Birkbeck, in a
course of Anatomical Lectures which he was then delivering to the
Mechanics of London, having arrived at the precise point whereat my
difficulties arose, proposed to his class to exhibit to them the
muscles upon the recent subject: by which alone, as he explained to
them, they can be properly shewn. He referred to the prejudices which
prevail against practical Anatomy, and professing an inclination to
indulge them, should they be paramount to the general desire of
knowledge, he promised, rather than disgust his audience, to continue
his course (in a very imperfect manner certainly, but as well as he
could) by the aid of plates, diagrams, &c. Dr. B. left it with his
large audience to determine the point, when they, with an honourable
unanimity and readiness, accepted the offer of the recent subject,
with acclamations. The subject was produced in accordance with their
good resolutions, and the course has proceeded regularly, not only
without disgust, but with that genuine delight which accompanies
_perfect_ information. Thus has Dr. Birkbeck accomplished that object
in the acquisition of which I should have preceded him, (though in a
very humble manner as to the Lecturer, yet with the proud and pleasing
advantage of addressing professional, literary and scientific men with
regard to the audience) but for Yarde’s direct disobedience to very
plain and positive orders. Dr. B. is a champion of science and
education, but not such only; he is a true and an enlightened patriot.
He is teaching his countrymen “the _task of greatness_,” as well as
“the path of honour;” and, what is perhaps of more moment than either,
he is teaching them to be happy. “Hæc studia adolescentiam alunt,
senectutem oblectant, secundas res ornant, adversis perfugium ac
solatium præbent, delectant domi, non impediunt foris, pernoctant
nobiscum, peregrinantur, rusticantur. _Quod si ipsi hæc neque
attingere, neque sensu nostro gustare possemus, tamen ea mirari
deberemus, etiam cùm in aliis videremus.”_――CICERO.

So much for the prosecution: and having been acquitted as a matter of
course, of the obnoxious part of the charge, by a _jury of common
sense_, as I have ever been by those who can appreciate the motives of
a student of science and the feelings of a gentleman, as well as at
that bar, which is to every man of honour as tangible and as terrible
as that of any Guildhall in Europe, the bar of my own conscience;
having, I say, passed unhurt through that ordeal which my prosecutors
presented to me, and through that which they ought sometimes to impose
upon themselves, (on Sundays at least,) I can but say in return, that
I am equally obliged to those who followed up, and those who
suggested, that unique indictment. I regret only, that all its details
were not cited in open court, in order that the deep malignancy, and
the entire impotency of the originators might have appeared in
ludicrous opposition, face to face; and that my own name, of so small
consequence as it is, _per se_, might have borrowed a moment’s lustre
from its proximity to so black a foil. “Let them digest the venom of
their spleen,” and beware, lest some harsh-sounding truth teller apply
to them the lines of the Satirist,

     “Compound for sins they are inclin’d to,
      By damning those they have no mind to.”

They will smile at these remarks because they are unsupported by any
authority. But these gentry _may_ receive a graver and heavier rebuke;
such as, from its eminent and official source, shall convincingly
teach them, that to conspire against the future prospects of any man,
by raking up a groundless charge of felony against him, when his
character is untainted, and his pursuits _even in the imputed felony_
are useful and honourable, is _in itself_ so very _contemptible_, and
yet so _heinous_ an offence _against common society_, as to require a
_direct rebuke from the Chief Magistrate_, and to deserve that severe
punishment which would follow an action at law. Give me leave, Sir, to
request (if, indeed, in acknowledging your authority, I am not rightly
entitled to demand) that you will, at some convenient opportunity,
signify to my prosecutors, (whose legal superior and whose
fellow-parishioner you are) your strong sense of the impropriety of
their conduct. You cannot be in error, for you are preceded by the
voice of Mr. Justice Park, and by that of the Court of King’s Bench,
and you will be echoed by the loud and equitable cry of the public in
general. Pardon me, Sir, if I press my solicitation upon this point,
as firmly as courtesy will allow me; probably, however, it needs only
to be mentioned.――As a man you will be indignant at such shameful
proceedings, and as a magistrate you will feel it your duty to reprove
them.

Can there be a gentleman, can there be a scholar, can there be a
Christian, among my persecutors? Gentlemen scorn dishonourable
actions, scholars are liberal toward science and the students of it,
and Christians are just at least, being commanded not to “bear false
witness against their neighbour.” Can they possibly, can _any learned
individual_ among them, find texts to justify the accusing a man of a
disgraceful offence, when he knows that none has been committed? There
_is_ that, however, which “makes all doctrines plain and clear,” and
it is the duty of every man to acquire popularity――his interest at
least――and if his interest, then his duty: because, if it be the duty
of a citizen to promote the _general_ good, how can he do that in a
readier way, than by promoting his _own_ good? For, the whole consists
of parts, and he is, undoubtedly, a part of the whole. Wherefore, by
consulting his own individual good, regardless of irrelevancies, (for
such, in this scholastic view of things, honour and honesty must be
allowed to be,) a man is evidently, and _bona fide_, playing the part
of a good citizen. This is perfectly clear. It appears an irrefragable
syllogism, as fair as some of ours in physic, perhaps as some of yours
in law. For _Divinity_, I have not a word to say about it. I leave it
(_and the present argument too_) in the pastoral hands of _any Divine
who may have already busied himself in it_. Is it then, possible, some
persons may inquire, who are less acquainted with the world and its
hypocrisy, and with the officers of St. David’s, than you, Sir, must
necessarily be; is it possible that any Divines have so degraded
themselves as to have excited or abetted these malicious proceedings?
Yet, it should be remembered, that a desire of popularity will
transform the noblest spirits, as, in the fable, it makes a lion pride
himself upon the accomplishments of an ass. The post of “a
door-keeper” is little desirable, whatever may be said about it, and
the sentiment of the Devil has more admirers:

     “Better to reign in hell, than serve in heaven.”

Those who have been most active in the late prosecution, cannot have
felt more real regret, than I have myself experienced. _My_ uneasiness
(whatever may have been the nature of _theirs_) consisted in a
participation in the distresses of those persons, whose private
feelings had been so deeply and (as I fear they supposed) cruelly
wounded; and in the reflection, that the disgusting subject of human
disinterment must be again agitated, commented upon, written upon; a
subject which, of all others, whether relating to a necessity or not,
ought to be kept profoundly silent, and almost mysteriously secret.

Upon this declaration, I proceed to state, that it is one of my
objects in the publication of this letter, to make all the reparation
I am able to the friends of the late Mrs. Taylor; assuring them, that
I sympathize with them in those distresses, which must have arisen
from the violence offered to some of the best of feelings, at the same
time declaring, that the choice made (so far as I know, and as I
believe) was entirely fortuitous, and by no means intended to affect
their family particularly. It is my intention, moreover, by this
letter, to apologize to the public in general, for certain imprudent
conduct which has led to the late lamentable agitation of the public
mind. “Nullum numen abest si sit prudentia.” But after this
acknowledgment I must be permitted to explain myself, and to show
wherein I allow myself to have acted imprudently. To be fairly
understood, I must beg permission to say a few words which would
otherwise be entirely irrelevant. Having it in prospect to settle in
Devon, (solely from certain notions of its warmth and salubrity,) I
determined upon Exeter as my place of residence, without any other
knowledge of it than that possessed by every Englishman; viz. that it
is a large and important city. It was represented to me as a place of
enlightened and elegant pursuits, and upon this opinion a
recommendation was founded, that I should offer to its resident gentry
a course of Anatomical Lectures. In furtherance of this design, my
friend, Mr. Wilton Toulmin, the originator of the proposition, held
out to me the following very important inducement; that he could at
any time purchase a subject from a certain medical school in London.
This, from his influence at that school, I did not doubt for a moment.
After some months I proposed my Lectures, by advertisement and by
circulars; and having had abundant encouragement, I commenced them in
October last, before an audience of about forty gentlemen of the
greatest respectability. After the delivery of about ten Lectures, I
arrived at the part of my course where it was necessary (as had been
promised in the circulars) that I should exhibit the muscles upon the
recent subject, and I made my application to London without the least
doubt as to the result. After a few days, my friend (who is as zealous
as persevering, and as able as any agent can possibly be) replied,
that he had been refused in the most direct manner, and that the fact
was to him quite inexplicable. He could not conceive the cause of it.
Persons who were quite familiar to him, and whose business it was to
act upon these occasions, replied steadily to every application, that
an injunction had been laid against sending _me_ a subject, and that
it had been caused by some Exeter person or persons. Is it necessary,
Sir, that I make any comment upon this manœuvre? It seems as if its
ingenious author, who did me the honour of so much notice, determined
to annoy me, and, if possible, defeat my object. To that end, he made
himself acquainted with the place whence I intended to procure my
subject, and then found means of spreading such stories as should
influence its petty officers, box-carriers, beadles, porters, and the
like, (for the head of that establishment is indignant at the
transaction, and cordially promised me his protection,) so as to bring
about that refusal, which (strangely enough) was so very efficacious.
Having thus succeeded in driving me to the necessity either of
discontinuing my Lectures, or of authorizing some disinterment upon
the spot, this _gentleman_ sat silently watching the event. None could
be more fortunate. The resurrection-man seemed as if he had tacitly
come into the gentleman’s project; for, having provided me, not with a
subject only, but with some valueless linen also, to possess which, it
was thought, would have made my misdemeanor a felony, the former, in
the most obliging manner, enacted a dexterous and finishing stroke to
the game thus played by the porters, box-carriers, and gentleman, in
alliance. The man was paid for his trouble, and it was agreed that he
should receive a second fee upon this sole and oft-repeated
condition,――that he returned to the place whence he had procured the
body, and destroyed every vestige of the transaction:――so, leaving the
act “uninjurious because unknown.” He promised, he solemnly promised,
to do this. I had no reason to disbelieve him, and, reflecting upon
the probable efficacy of his promised reward, I confidently hoped,
that the feelings of relations and of the public would have suffered
no injury. What really occurred I need not repeat. The man, I suppose,
went off in some other direction, without making any effort at doing
what it was his duty to have done, and (as I at that time conceived)
that of no other person. Since that affair, however, I can readily
admit that it would have been prudent, and in every respect proper,
either personally, or by means of another, to have ascertained that
the thing was really and decently done and completed. So far as I have
said, I acknowledge myself to have acted imprudently; and so far,
therefore, do I apologize to the public, and more particularly to the
friends of the deceased.

Anatomy, however, must be studied. Is it possible that any one can
doubt this? I am informed, Sir, that it _is_ possible. But if this be
true, I am sure the strange opinion must be held by those who never
employed a thought upon the subject. Give me leave to recommend such
persons to consult their medical attendants upon the nature and
consequences of the following diseases,――aneurism, hernia, stone,
cataract. Let them inquire, further, how they are to be remedied, and
how frequent they are in their occurrence; and then, and thereafter, I
pledge myself that their prejudices against dissection of the human
body will have been lessened, if not overthrown.

“Anatomy,” says Mr. Abernethy in a pamphlet published on the occasion
of the enlargement of an Anatomical Theatre, under the sanction of the
Governors of a contiguous Hospital; “Anatomy forms the only basis on
which the superstructure of medical science can possibly be built. We
must understand the healthy structure and functions of the various
organs and parts of the body, or we can never understand the nature of
their diseases, nor the rational mode of effecting their cure.”

Here is a broad declaration from the highest authority, and comment
would but weaken its effect. To the great majority of thinking men, it
will appear as if I were going about to prove that pain was an evil,
by advancing arguments in proof of the necessity of Anatomy. But I
have good reasons for believing, that certain persons who talk loudly
about the horrors of disinterment, are quite unaware of the nature or
object of that science, which they would consent to sacrifice at the
shrine of an ill-directed, if even a praiseworthy feeling. Let me ask
these persons, whether, in the event of a painful and dangerous
illness occurring to themselves or their families, they would not
desire the attendance of that medical practitioner whom they believed
to be skilled in his profession? If any one of them reply to this
inquiry affirmatively, I beg of that individual to read again the
sentence which I have just quoted from Mr. Abernethy. Dissection and
disinterment are _both_ forgotten and forgiven, when agony distorts
the features of a beloved sufferer, or when death seems to be
impending over him; and when that science which but for Anatomy (_and
in the present state of things but for disinterment_) could not exist,
is ready at hand to relieve from torture, or to snatch from death. On
the other hand, how numerous are actions against surgeons merely for
supposed want of skill in treating fractures and other cases, when the
patient does not acquire that relief which he expects. Suppose I were
exposed to an action from my prosecutors for ignorance in that science
which they have just prosecuted me for studying, who would be more
ready to prosecute than they?

Lest, however, our patients should delicately refrain from seeking
information of their medical attendants, as supposing that they would
be unwilling to betray the secrets of their _art and mystery_, let
them be assured, that necromancy and juggling are not farther removed
from the _practice_ of medicine and surgery, than are reserve and
mystery from that _theoretical_ information, which every educated
practitioner is, at all times, willing to afford. Permit me, Sir, to
use this opportunity of detailing a case in surgery: a practice which,
in my opinion, ought more frequently to be resorted to, as a means of
impressing the public mind with a conviction of the value, _the
indispensability_, of practical Anatomy.

There is a large artery on each side of the neck conveying blood to
the head: of so great magnitude is it, that, could the murderer wound
it by a puncture only, his business would be sufficiently done,
without any further division. A very small wound of this vessel would
give vent to so many pounds of blood, in a few seconds, as would cause
immediate death. Now this artery is subject to a disease called
Aneurism, wherein its coats yield (perhaps on one side of the vessel)
so as to form a small pulsating tumour. It is a membranous sac
containing blood. It communicates with the interior of the artery, so
that the contents of the tumour are easily squeezed back into the
artery, whence, upon the removal of the pressure, the blood
immediately returns into the sac. This tumour, gradually enlarged by
the continuance of morbid actions, and by the impetus of the
circulating blood, acquires, perhaps, the size of a large orange. The
skin is in a constant state of increasing tension, and it finally
becomes inflamed, and ulcerates, and the tumour bursts. After what was
said of the size of the artery, I need not dwell upon the certainty of
immediate death. The remedy consists in exposing the vessel between
the diseased portion and the heart, (_i. e._ in the neck,) and closing
it by applying a ligature upon it. This operation well performed, and
under favourable circumstances, effects a perfect cure. But it is
dreadful for any man to attempt it, (and there are many operations
much more difficult,) without the most exact anatomical knowledge. It
were far better that he allowed his patient to die _secundum naturam_,
than that he presumed to hasten his death, by destroying him _secundum
artem_. And, better were it many times over, that he experimented upon
his own, than upon the throats of his unfortunate patients. Does he
know the exact situation of the artery relatively to the deep parts
about it? Does he know by what parts it is covered? Then let him
proceed to expose it. It is surrounded by parts vitally important. It
is in close contact with a great vein which partially overlaps it, and
which is in continual motion. Should he wound this vein ever so
slightly, the probability is that the operation is fatal; and yet, he
has to separate it from the artery, and this at the bottom of a wound
which is covered with blood. Important nerves environ the artery, and
to include one of them in the ligature with it, would be as certainly
fatal as to injure the vein. Suppose a dexterous man and an anatomist
to be the operator: he leaves these important parts uninjured, because
he knows their situation, and that of all the parts concerned; also,
because he is calm and collected, from a consciousness of his own
resources. He exposes a portion of the artery, he conveys a ligature
around it, and his patient is safe. Suppose, again, that the operator,
from a delicate sentimentality, has held disinterment to outweigh, in
horror, any good that can arise from it, and has neglected to study
Anatomy, lest he should encourage this “disgusting traffic.” Imagine
this philosopher encountering these difficulties at the bottom of a
bleeding wound. He cannot find the vessel at all, perhaps, before he
has divided it, and a fatal gush of blood informs him of the result of
his temerity. Or, he opens the vein, he divides some of the nerves, or
he ties them up with the artery. It is all the same. He might as well
have laid open the original tumour, and thus have killed the patient
at once.

That man’s prejudices against Anatomy, Mr. Mayor, _and even against
disinterment_, must be rooted indeed, who, in the face of such facts
as these, would still oppose himself against some slight sacrifice of
feeling, to secure such important advantages as anatomical knowledge
has been seen to confer. But, Sir, _the law requires of medical men
that they be Anatomists_. It is illegal to commence practice before
obtaining the certificate of the Society of Apothecaries; and the
candidate for this necessary credential is required to bring proofs of
his having attended anatomical lectures, and is then examined as to
his knowledge of Anatomy. Mark, therefore, Sir, I beseech you, the
dilemma in which we stand. _It is illegal to obey the laws._ I would
humbly hope, that a thorough investigation of the real state of
things, may incline you, in any future transactions of this kind, to
view them with that leniency which gentlemen will always feel inclined
to extend toward scientific objects, and which has been ever held to
be consistent with, if not the most ennobling quality of, Justice.

And here let me pointedly assert, what is also, I understand, doubted
by many, viz. that actual dissection of the human body is essential to
any available anatomical knowledge. It is one of the terse remarks of
the eminent anatomist whom I have before quoted, in reply to the
vulgar complaint that the dead are “mangled” by Surgeons, “_Either the
dead or the living must be mangled_:”――but, I believe, after what has
been said before upon the connexion between Anatomy and Surgery, that
it is needless to enlarge upon this point. It must be plain that books
and plates cannot qualify a man to remove a stone from his neighbour’s
bladder, or to lay open the fore part of his friend’s eye, and
therefore I refrain from touching upon the subject.

Next comes the important question, How are subjects to be obtained?
Disinterment, it is now well known, affords by far the greater number
of those used in the schools. But, surely, it is a little hard upon
the profession, not only to deny to them any fair and agreeable means
of procuring subjects, but after compelling them to converse with the
most equivocal characters that they may procure what is absolutely
necessary to them, to denounce their dealings with such men as
criminal and felonious. If there had been any complaint, it might,
most rationally, have been expected from us, pioneers levelling the
path of life: who, while expected to be ever ready to assist our
masters, whensoever their necessities require our interference, are
unprovided with the principal instrument required in the work. Nay
more, when we exert _ourselves_, and procure it in the best way we
can, in a state scarcely fit for handling, the implement being utterly
useless for any other purpose, we are rewarded with complaints and
abuse. Would this were all: we are prosecuted. (_Once, we were,
facetiously enough, indicted for a felony upon this score; but it need
not be feared a second time: for the wit of the proceeding not
happening immediately to appear, this merry conceit assumed too much
the tone of malice aforethought, to render the jest expedient in
future._) But, something ought to be done to relieve the medical
profession from the disgusting necessities under which it is placed.
Criminals whose bodies are sentenced to dissection, afford, happily, a
very inadequate supply. Instances of persons bequeathing their remains
for the purposes of science are very rare. An eminent example,
however, of that kind of liberality occurred lately in the metropolis,
and the donor was of the Medical Profession. It has been said, Why do
not Surgeons _generally_ set an example of such devotedness to
science? There is no justice in such a demand. As well might it be
required of the clergyman, whose duty it is to compose and direct
toward heaven the last thoughts of a dying criminal, that he should
precede or accompany him thither. It is not under the influence of my
own feelings that I deny the fairness of such a demand, but for the
reasons I have stated: for might I hope to bring about a practice,
which I acknowledge to be desirable, while I deny its incumbency, I
would, with the utmost pleasure, put my hand to such a testament
immediately. The gentleman referred to, desired that his body might be
conveyed to a medical school for the benefit of the students, and
having been satisfactorily examined, that it should be returned to his
friends for interment. Such a laudable practice as this, need not be
confined to surgeons: the public are at least _equally_ interested in
it; and most sincerely do I hope, that this eminent example may not
want followers, either in or out of the profession. One of this
gentleman’s declared objects was to recommend such a practice, and it
has every thing noble and useful to recommend it.

But “they manage these things better in France.” Every dead body which
has lain for inspection a certain time, and is unclaimed, is sent to
one or other of the schools of Anatomy, whence it is returned after
proper examination enveloped in matting and ready for interment. This
is an ancient custom in Paris, and a very important one. A subject is,
by means of it, to be obtained for about five or six francs, and
students are enabled to dissect with greater perseverance than in this
country, where no subject is to be obtained for less than ten or
twelve guineas. “There are unhappily,” says Mr. Abernethy, “in this,
as well as in other countries, numbers who die without friends or
relatives to mourn their loss. If then the superintendents of prisons,
poor-houses, and eleemosynary establishments, would but consent that
the remains of those who die in such circumstances and are unclaimed,
should be made the subjects of anatomical instruction, we should be
put upon the same footing as other nations, and the obnoxious offence
of disinterring the dead, would be no longer necessary, or committed.”
Here would be no injury to the feelings of any person; for the word
“_dissection_,” “_examination_” should be substituted; and it should
be fully understood, that the corpse would be subsequently and
decently buried. Ought not the bodies of many suicides to be so
examined, and would not such a law lessen the frequency of those
horrible occurrences? It is proposed above, to ask the _consent of_
the superintendents of hospitals, &c.; but I believe, nothing less
than a legal enactment, will relieve the profession and the public
generally, from this constant source of annoyance. You are probably
aware, Sir, that Mr. Peel has given notice of his intention to propose
a bill to facilitate the acquisition of subjects. In what precise
manner it is his intention to proceed in this untrodden path, it is
impossible to presume. But proceed he most certainly will; and if ever
good were to be augured from an enlightened, liberal-minded, talented
senate, now is a time when we may look forward with sanguine
expectation. Mr. Peel is well known to entertain the most liberal
views upon the subject, and it would be strange indeed, if a gentleman
so distinguished, so much a scholar, and so much a patriot, should,
amid numerous wise enactments, overlook those serious obstacles, which
prejudice, ignorance, and vulgarity throw in the way of medical and
surgical science. Upon these hopes I would congratulate the
profession, and their patients no less, as upon a promise of a very
important good. Mr. Peel, I am convinced, will never fail us, if the
good sense of the country do but second his endeavours. For himself,
at least, he will earn the meed of true greatness. “Homines enim ad
Deos nulla re proprius accedunt, quam salutem hominibus dando.”

I believe, Sir, it is needless that I trouble you with any more
observations. Should the foregoing be a cause of uneasiness to any
person who peruses them, my whole justification lies in this, that
there is not one which I have not felt myself bound to submit. For
yourself, Mr. Mayor, men of eminent ability will, certainly, be
compelled by their less gifted fellow citizens, to assume high and
responsible situations: and dazzling as their elevation may be to the
vulgar eye, we are assured that the cares and toils of office, are
ever in proportion to its dignity and importance. None can be supposed
to enjoy distinction and honour unqualified and unmixed. Of course,
_we_ hold in especial veneration the name of Mayor, connected as it is
with so many grand and sublime associations. We consider, not the
extent of his authority alone, but those high moral and intellectual
qualifications, which are presumed to be inherent in one whose arduous
office it is to fill the Corporation Chair, and dignify the civic
pageant. To such an officer, and actuated by such feelings, have _I_
betaken myself in my wronged and calumniated situation.

The adjudication of the past misdemeanor, but for the reasons which
have been stated, would have been heard from you, and doubtless you
would have inflicted some temperate punishment. You would have replied
to any proposer of partiality, _I will do my duty, in spite of threats
or entreaties_――and most honourable would your answer have been. Now,
Sir, I myself have to perform, though an humbler, yet, a piece of duty
equally imperative, if not equally important. While I profess to
practice medicine and surgery it is my duty to study Anatomy, and I
may reply with you, I will do _my_ duty in spite of threats or of
obstacles. Nay, I shall be frank enough to go a little further, and
declare unequivocally, that I will study Practical Anatomy as long as
I have life, and will give all possible assistance to any persons who
are following the same pursuit.

                     I am, Mr. Mayor,

                           Your very humble servant,

                                              WM. COOKE.




Printed by Mills, Jowett, and Mills, Bolt-court, Fleet-street.




Transcriber’s Note

This book was written in a period when many words had not become
standardized in their spelling. Words may have multiple spelling
variations or inconsistent hyphenation in the text. These have been
left unchanged. Misspelled words were not corrected. Words and phrases
in italics are surrounded by underscores, _like this_.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NECESSITY OF DISINTERMENT,
UNDER EXISTING CIRCUMSTANCES ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
